SOTO: The first amendment states that the United States Congress can't make any law about your religion, or stop you from practicing your religion, or keep you from saying whatever you want, or publishing whatever you want (like in a newspaper or a book). And Congress can't stop you from meeting peacefully for a demonstration to ask the government to change something.
SOTO: The second amendment states that congress can't stop people from having and carrying weapons, because we need to be able to defend ourselves.
SOTO: The third amendment states that you don't have to let soldiers live in your house, except if there is a war, and even then only if the United States Congress has passed a law about it.
SOTO: The fourth amendment states that nobody can search your body, or your house, or your papers and things, unless they can prove to a judge that they have a good reason to think you have committed a crime.
SOTO: The fifth amendment states that you can't be tried for any serious crime without a Grand Jury meeting first to decide whether there's enough evidence for a trial. And if the jury decides you are innocent, the government can't try again with another jury. You don't have to say anything at your trial. You can't be killed, or put in jail, or fined, unless you were convicted of a crime by a jury. And the government can't take your house or your farm or anything that is yours, unless the government pays for it.
SOTO: The sixth amendment states that if you're arrested, you have a right to have your trial pretty soon, and the government can't keep you in jail without trying you. The trial has to be public, so everyone knows what is happening. The case has to be decided by a jury of ordinary people from your area. You have the right to know what you are accused of, to see and hear the people who are witnesses against you, to have the government help you get witnesses on your side, and you have the right to a lawyer to help you.
SOTO: The seventh amendment states that you also have the right to a jury when it is a civil case (a law case between two people rather than between you and the government).
SOTO: The eighth amendment states that the government can't make you pay more than is reasonable in bail or in fines, and the government can't order you to have cruel or unusual punishments (like torture) even if you are convicted of a crime.
SOTO: The ninth amendment states that just because these rights are listed in the Constitution doesn't mean that you don't have other rights too.
SOTO: The tenth amendment states that anything that the Constitution doesn't say that Congress can do should be left up to the states, or to the people.
SOTO: During and after the American Revolution, when the rich white men were writing the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution and the Bill of Rights, many people who were not rich, or white, or men thought maybe this was their chance to get equal rights too. They wrote to the men who were writing the Constitution and asked them to give women, and black people, and poor people, Jews, and Native Americans equal rights with rich white men. These people did win some rights for themselves, but they couldn't get equal rights with rich white men.
SOTO: Women could not vote until 1920, or be elected as President or as Senators or anything else.
SOTO: No Jews were elected to Congress until 1844. In some states, like Maryland and North Carolina, non-Christians could not legally be judges or elected officials for more than fifty years after the Constitution passed.
SOTO: The rich white men writing the Constitution agreed that only rich white men could vote, and they agreed that when the census takers were counting the population of each state, a black man would count as only three-fifths as much as a white man. 
SOTO: Native Americans were not allowed to vote in the first hundred years of the United States government. Native American men did not get the right to vote until 1889, and then only if they left their tribes and lived like white men. It was 1924 before tribal Indians could vote.